Dolphins are majestic, highly-intelligent sea creatures who mostly prefer warmer, tropical waters.  A thick layer of blubber helps with buoyancy, keeps them warm in cooler waters or deeper depths, and serves to streamline their flexible bodies.  They have excellent hearing, which is adapted for both air and water.  Dolphins swim by waving their tail fin and rear body up-and-down while using their fins for steering.  When they dive, in order to conserve oxygen, they can choose to slow down the rhythm of their heartbeat.

Dolphins produce a fascinating array of vocalizations, including whistles, pulse sounds, and clicks.  Dolphin clicks are special; created by an organ called a “melon,” clicks are used for echolocation and give dolphins biosonar powers.  Bottlenose dolphins, the “classic” black-and-white dolphin, have signature whistles, unique to each specific individual.  They develop their own signature whistle in their first year and use it for their whole lifetime.  Bottlenose dolphins recognize each others’ whistles and address another dolphin by mimicking his or her signature whistle.

Sociable, playful, and altruistic, dolphins live in pods of up to a dozen individuals.  Mothers carry their babies for 11-17 months, depending upon the type of dolphin.  In an exceptional display of culture, mothers of some dolphin species teach daughters how to use sponges to cover the snout as a form of protection while foraging for food.  Dolphins are known for being incredibly playful, blowing bubbles with one another and leaping above the water’s surface. 

In Greek mythology, dolphins were esteemed as the helpers of humankind.  Seeing dolphins swimming in the wake of a ship was considered a good omen by the Ancient Greeks and many ancient coins pictured a young man riding on the back of a dolphin.

The devastating decline in the dolphin population over the past several decades has alarmed many scientists.  Some researchers estimate that, in the Indian Ocean alone, the current number of dolphins is only 13% of what it was in 1980, a mortality rate that they consider “unsustainable.”

Many factors are contributing to the alarming fall in dolphin numbers.  By far the worst culprit is fishing gear, particularly gillnets.  Hundreds of thousands of dolphins have died in these massive nets, which have been banned by the United Nations.  Gillnets are rectangular, impenetrable barriers in the ocean, stretching up to 50 miles long and 20 meters deep.  Like a wall of netting, gillnets entangle their intended prey, with many dolphins accidentally caught in the trap.

Noise pollution is another major factor damaging the dolphin population worldwide.  Noise pollution refers to the underwater sounds of boat traffic, naval sonar, torpedo testing, and offshore construction.  All this unnatural, man-made noise is very stressful to dolphins.  It interferes with how they communicate and navigate, and can even prove fatal: in some cases, dolphins swim to the surface too quickly to escape all the racket.  Surfacing too quickly can cause decompression sickness, which creates nitrogen bubbles in the body and can lead to paralysis.

In some parts of the world, dolphins are even hunted for their meat.  Most often, they are killed by harpoons or slaughtered, en masse, in what is called a “drive hunt,” where an entire pod is forced to beach themselves on shore after being pursued by a group of boats.

Some dolphin species are now critically endangered.  In fact, the Yangtze river dolphin, once considered the goddess of protection for local fishermen and boatmen, is considered extinct: the last known Yangtze river dolphin died in 2002.

Dolphins are amazing animals and many organizations are working hard to make the world a safer place for orcas, belugas, and all the members of the cetacean family.